---
layout: minutes
date: 2017-10-23
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2017-10-23
---
# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}

**Date:** 2017-10-23

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2017Oct/0037.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2017/10/23-pwg-irc.txt)
## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Leonard Rosenthol, Tzviya Siegman, Wolfgang Schindler, Avneesh Singh, Rachel Comerford, Baldur Bjarnason, Joshua Pyle, Dave Cramer, Luc Audrain, Matt Garrish, Ivan Herman, Romain Deltour, Chris Maden, JunGamo, Lillian Sullam, Evan Yamanishi, Jeff Printy, Bill Kasdorf, Garth Conboy, George Kerscher, Ric Wright, Hadrien Gardeur, Laurent Le Meur, Heather Flanagan, Marisa DeMeglio, Brady Duga, Tim Cole, Peter Krautzberger, Mateus Teixeira, Charles LaPierre, Deborah Kaplan

**Regrets:** Vladimir Levantovsky, Evan Owens, Reinaldo Ferraz, Nick Ruffilo

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Tzviya Siegman

**Scribe(s):** Rachel Comerford
## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Wolfgang Schindler:* *welcome back, leonard!

### 1. last week's minutes
{: #section1}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2017/2017-10-16-minutes.html](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2017/2017-10-16-minutes.html)

> ***Resolution #1: Meeting minutes approved***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Tzviya Siegman:** new members?  

### 2. Packaging
{: #section2}

**Tzviya Siegman:** this is on the agenda for TPAC  
… security is not on the agenda for TPAC (confirmed by leonardr)  
… packaging and web packaging are due in a few weeks  
… we should define what our requirements are  
… we can have a discussion or start a google doc  

**Leonard Rosenthol:** the trick to packaging is that we're looking at this as a "package neutral" approach  
… anything we write up, we want to continue that approach  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/15oig71-ybZDt7G-C0CGmf7KG9k35y0ggu7sXLRadH2k/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15oig71-ybZDt7G-C0CGmf7KG9k35y0ggu7sXLRadH2k/edit?usp=sharing)

**Liisa McCloy-Kelley:** one requirement is that the package can be quite large  
… audio is a good reason for this  

**Dave Cramer:** I hope we're not proposing making our own pkg system. I would mention that the impact of existing pkging has an impact on our spec including manifest and other elements  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we are hoping not to create something new  

**Ivan Herman:** there is similar work to be done as we did for wp in terms of requirements gathering. Some notes in WP might be better suited for PWP.  
… one thing we discussed is essential vs nonessential resources which is relevant for offlining and packaging  

> *Dave Cramer:* Notes we have formal requirements! [http://w3c.github.io/dpub-pwp-ucr/index.html#pwp](http://w3c.github.io/dpub-pwp-ucr/index.html#pwp)

**Ivan Herman:** some of the security and integrity issues may be different when we talk about packaging and web packaging  
… we must make it clear in the draft that it is not the goal of the group to create a new packaging format  

**Garth Conboy:** at one time there was rough agreement (I thought it was a good idea) that we would have default reading order and then secondary stuff, that you could take offline  
… back to leonardr comment about package neutral, this makes pwp a thin specification  
… if pwp is going to be package neutral we need to also look at the epub4 profile to examine what an actual package will be  

**Baldur Bjarnason:** in terms of what ivan said in terms of security, we need to support some sort of signing based on the domains.  

> *Dave Cramer:* +1 to Baldur

**Baldur Bjarnason:** if we want symmetry between packaged and unpackaged  
… it needs to be something that can be easily implemented in a single work station. Some dialog with people that manage whatever format we go with to make sure they allow local host resources in packages because otherwise we are looking at a complex deployment with access control which is unmanageable  

> *Rachel Comerford:* Wolfgang what do you mean by package neutral in packaging

> *Dave Cramer:* Unpackaging the Google format is exciting because you have to reverse the HPACK header compression

**Luc Audrain:** packaging and unpackaging : issues on server side to package (neutrality), and on device side to unpackage (low prerformance devices)  

> *Garth Conboy:* Indeed, seems odd!

**Hadrien Gardeur:** are we trying to have a single solution or are we considering multiple formats  
… I don't think we'd be able to do epub and a packaging format for the web at the same time. They are mutually exclusive  

**Dave Cramer:** can you explain why the google packaging format would not work for epub?  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** some of Jeffrey Yasskin's answers made it clear that these would not work, including signing  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we're listing requirements not making decisions  
… please add this as a requirement  

**Leonard Rosenthol:** we should consider as a part of the process, on the PWP document - building a profile in real life will clearly help us see what's generic vs profile specific  

> *Garth Conboy:* +1 Hadrien’s — the EPUB profile needs to support building publication that were never on the Web

**Leonard Rosenthol:** I can show the work we've done on pdf  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/15oig71-ybZDt7G-C0CGmf7KG9k35y0ggu7sXLRadH2k/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15oig71-ybZDt7G-C0CGmf7KG9k35y0ggu7sXLRadH2k/edit?usp=sharing)

**Tzviya Siegman:** we haven't agreed on generic packaging, this is a suggested requirements - let's get these all down  

> *Garth Conboy:* Dave: no doubt, not disagreeing.

### 3. Archiving
{: #section3}

**Tzviya Siegman:** we talked about including archiving as a part of one of these specs. Which spec does this belong to?  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** this sounds related to pwp but I'm not sure it is. There will be requirements around versioning - which goes beyond pwp.  

**Liisa McCloy-Kelley:** I wonder if you can clarify what you mean by archiving  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I have clarification from the digital publishing interest group  

**Leonard Rosenthol:** example - the US national archives announced that as of 2022 they will not longer accept physical material for archiving, digital only  

> *Ivan Herman:* +1 to leonardr

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* +1 to Leonard

> *Tzviya Siegman:* DPUB IG archiving [https://www.w3.org/dpub/IG/wiki/Task_Forces/archival](https://www.w3.org/dpub/IG/wiki/Task_Forces/archival)

**George Kerscher:** on a a call with Bill, we were told there was an ISO group working on archiving of epub3  
… we should make sure we're in sync  

**Luc Audrain:** I'm not aware of this ISO work. I wanted to say that for legal reasons there is a project in France to archive ebooks in the national library.  

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* I have not heard anything about archival EPUB3 and I chair the relevant ISO SC (TC171SC2) where this would be expected to happen.

**Bill Kasdorf:** A NISO proposal was sent out to members  

> *Tim Cole:* you also need to know when a pub has changed requiring archiving change of whole or part

**Tzviya Siegman:** archiving - how to construct a file so it is deconstructable  

**Deborah Kaplan:** archiving - how do we create a file that is preservable  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** even though it's tempting to look at each countries project, archiving here goes beyond that  
… there are a number of groups at each national library that we can talk to. We need to keep both archiving ebooks and archiving the web in mind  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* Here's some explanatory text that was included in the ballot from NISO:

> *Bill Kasdorf:* “New versions of EPUB will be developed in W3C, since International Digital Publishing Forum merged to W3C in January 2017. In ISO, ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34 (Document description and processing languanges) co-ordinates EPUB standardization, but TC 46/SC 4 will for the time being be able to participate in the process due to our involvement in ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34/JWG 7 with JTC 1/SC 34 and IEC TA 100. JWG 7 is developing long term preservation -related spe[CUT]”

> *Bill Kasdorf:* The balance of the quote I pasted in from the NISO ballot is important: "This specification will not be part of EPUB family of standards, but if an archivable version of the format ("EPUB/A") is developed in the future, the results from JWG 7 can support the process."

**Leonard Rosenthol:** back to the original question - are these wp or pwp? I think there are points that need to be on both  

**Tzviya Siegman:** sounds as though we need archiving requirements for WP and PWP  

**Ivan Herman:** we might want to consider  having some kind of workshop where we bring together national library representatives to discuss archiving on both levels (WP and PWP)  

> *Hadrien Gardeur:* +1 ivan

**Ivan Herman:** most of the people in this group do not have an archiving background  

> *Luc Audrain:* +1 to archiving workshop

**Deborah Kaplan:** there are a number of people with the expertise from the archivist side in this group  
… the same as any niche area within this group such as locators and accessibility  

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* PDF Conference being hosted by NARA & LOC - [https://www.pdfa.org/new/pdf-day-washington-dc-registration-is-now-open/](https://www.pdfa.org/new/pdf-day-washington-dc-registration-is-now-open/)

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* may be worth coordinating with them...

**Tzviya Siegman:** volunteers to work on archiving requirements  
… dkaplan3 volunteers  
… I think we can say that archiving requirements are to come  

> *Luc Audrain:* We should involve people from National Libraries

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* link to paperless NARA article: [https://fcw.com/articles/2017/08/24/nara-paperless-future-mazmanian.aspx](https://fcw.com/articles/2017/08/24/nara-paperless-future-mazmanian.aspx)

**Ivan Herman:** if we can do more that's welcome  

**Bill Kasdorf:** the NISO and ISO project is specifically regarding long term preservation which is one type of archiving  

**George Kerscher:** I can ping Todd Carpenter from NISO and the deputy director of Library services if there's something we would like to ask of them  

> *Luc Audrain:* I’ll contact people from the French National Library who cares about this point

**Deborah Kaplan:** we don't need to get into the weeds right now  
… there are "tiers" of archiving much like accessibility. There is a lot of research we can pull from to document  

**Bill Kasdorf:** Francis Cave is excellent to work with  

> *Garth Conboy:* Tzviya says “quirky” when she might mean something else.  :-)

### 4. Spring Face to Face
{: #section4}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/F2F/2018.05.Toronto](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/F2F/2018.05.Toronto)

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* `<clap>``<clap>`

**Tzviya Siegman:** Kobo is hosting us in Toronto in May  
… hopefully many of you can come  
… thanks Kobo!  

### 5. TPAC
{: #section5}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/12J3Y3bb5fdPh1r2XH9YloINkNSxBJArocKY108sYCZ0/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12J3Y3bb5fdPh1r2XH9YloINkNSxBJArocKY108sYCZ0/edit?usp=sharing)

**Tzviya Siegman:** we've pretty much finalized the agenda. This is your chance for last minute changes.  

**Avneesh Singh:** regarding the accessibility tf meeting has been scheduled with Silver and APA We will talk about incorporating publishing in Silver or WCAG roadmap  
… if main group people are interested they are welcome to join  
… it's monday at 3:30 or 4:30  

**Ivan Herman:** send the exact info and I will add to the google doc  

**Ivan Herman:** I've seen 2 pending questions/issues  
… marcos cannot be at our web manifest meeting. Do we want to switch it to a better time for him?  
… we do have a session for transitions, can we invite Samuel Petit  
… I've said yes but I do not know if it will fit timewise  
… we can finalize this wednesday  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** this is a discussion we're having within EDRLab as well  
… we could target something more pragmatic  

**Ivan Herman:** this Wednesday tzviya garth and I will finalize possibly with some minor changes  
… garth is on the hook for selecting a restaurant  

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* +1 for dinner sounds good...

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/publ-loc](https://github.com/w3c/publ-loc)

### 6. Open Pull Requests
{: #section6}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/pull/87](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/pull/87)

**Tzviya Siegman:** #87 is a point of clarification from mattg  

**Ivan Herman:** just merge  

> *Peter Krautzberger:* thanks.

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* Have a nice afternoon :)

> ***Resolution #2: Merge #87***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

---


### 7. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Meeting minutes approved
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Merge #87
