---
layout: minutes
date: 2017-07-17
title: Publishing WG Telco — 2017-07-17
---
# Publishing WG Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2017-07-17

See also the [Agenda](no comments, approved) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2017/07/17-pwd-irc.txt)
## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Tzviya Siegman, Wolfgang Schindler, Avneesh Singh, Luc Audrain, Ric Wright, Matt Garrish, Laurent Le Meur, Dave Cramer, Vladimir Levantovsky, Chris Maden, Romain Deltour, Bill Kasdorf, Tim Cole, Deborah Kaplan, Leonard Rosenthol, Garth Conboy, Charles LaPierre, Hadrien Gardeur, Mateus Teixeira, Brady Duga, George Kerscher, Benjamin Young

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Tzviya Siegman

**Scribe(s):** Laurent Le Meur
## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Wolfgang Schindler:* hi, to all of you :)

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* * gotomeeting tells me that the organizer is not yet present. Is this OK?

> *Laurent Le Meur:* laurent will scribe

> *Chris Maden:* lol

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [http://www.w3.org/2017/07/10-pwg-minutes.html](http://www.w3.org/2017/07/10-pwg-minutes.html)

> *Laurent Le Meur:* tasks distributed during the F2F

> *Mateus Teixeira:* mateus-teixeira has joined #pwg

> *Garth Conboy:* (Lurking from a plane — you all behave! :-)

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sXM51YzrfahFmkJBL-rt69Jvo0LGbOesleuEgwRWvP0/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sXM51YzrfahFmkJBL-rt69Jvo0LGbOesleuEgwRWvP0/edit?usp=sharing)

> *Laurent Le Meur:* early to draft, but draft to be ready in October

> *Laurent Le Meur:* Matt has seen no feed back, doesn't need assistance, if people see something, they can add an issue.

**Tzviya Siegman:** identifier section - really important matter  

> *Laurent Le Meur:* @dauwhe, thanks for the tip

> *Ric Wright:* and when the person says several lines worth, skip the name and use an ellipses  i.e ...

### 1. Task forces
{: #section1}

#### 1.1. About locators
{: #section1.1}

> *Laurent Le Meur:* .Benjamin Young: I'll be happy to help

**Yuri:** are these locators the same thing as the "old" CFI spec?  

**Benjamin:** the extended concept will be extended.  

**Yuri:** then we'll help, with annotations and Readium in mind  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* evidentpoint volunteers to contribute to locators and ids

**Leonard Rosenthol:** we were thinking about locators in a different way.  
… how do you talk about individual resources?  
… we didn't came upon sub-resources  

**Tim:** it will go into the github repo, let's discuss there  

**Tzviya Siegman:** keep in mind we are separate from DPUB. We don't want to create a new fragment identifier.  
… Content model, core media types, nobody assigned. Anybody volunteers? leave for now.  
… Document level annotations: isn't it about Web Annotations?  

**Leonard Rosenthol:** it should be much further down.  

> *Benjamin Young:* "Document (or Publication) level annotation" == identifier, doesn't it?

**BillK:** is it at the publication level or document level?  

> *Benjamin Young:* Web Annotation covers everything that can be identified.

**Leonard Rosenthol:** publication  

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* @bigbluehat - maybe :)

> *Benjamin Young:* Just need specs for identification (and location)

> *Tim Cole:* Web Anno covers how to describe the annotation, not what is done with it...

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* agreed that once we know what the identifier is, that it may be automatic

#### 1.2. metadata
{: #section1.2}

**Luc Audrain:** I can deal with that. Serialization is to be decided; first it is needed to list the necessary metadata  

**Tzviya Siegman:** and the minimum set of metadata a publication must support  

> *Laurent Le Meur:* Hugh McGuire: I volunteer

> *Hugh McGuire:* yes we are working on open textbooks / open monographs on the web. boris can work on metadata.

**Tzviya Siegman:** Manifest. There has been extensive discussion already  
… Navigation is assigned to Avneesh & George  

**George Kerscher:** we'll check all aspects of navigation  

#### 1.3. Sync media, in the a11y taskforce?
{: #section1.3}

**Avneesh Singh:** join work btw DAniel, Marisa and a11y taskforce  

#### 1.4. Implementation issues; maybe we'll deal with it as it comes up
{: #section1.4}

**Leonard Rosenthol:** let's keep it as a placeholder  

#### 1.5. Personalization
{: #section1.5}

**Mateus Teixeira:** I'm planning at starting a call for participation this week. Especially User to reading environment. Less clear on the Authoring aspect. -> Mostly from a publisher perspective.  

**Leonard Rosenthol:** one of the first thing we should discuss is understanding where we drow the line btw the author and user's needs.  

**Mateus Teixeira:** that makes sense.  

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* *+1 to @leonard on personalization

> *Mateus Teixeira:* +1

**Laurent Le Meur:** Jiminy is working on the Readium baseline CSS, which includes questions like how to get a night mode and GUI personalization working in front of complex CSS in ebooks. This will be usable as input for this taskforce.  

**Leonard Rosenthol:** at Adobe we has an initiative along the same lines  

**Tzviya Siegman:** for each section, do you have what you need?  

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* we've been focusing on typographic areas most recently (font size, font choice, colors, etc)

> *Hugh McGuire:* how do i get in speaker queue?

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* *@hughmcguire: type q+

> *Hugh McGuire:* great! thank you.

**Tzviya Siegman:** tools are calls for participation, write a paragraph and send it for review, open a github issue and wait for people to yield at you.  

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* * you're welcome!

**Tzviya Siegman:** you can write in a Google doc if you like  

> *Matt Garrish:* draft doc: [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/blob/master/index.html](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/blob/master/index.html)

**Murata Makoto:** what will be the status of the working draft: an agreed paper or a collection of sections not totally agreed?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** the published WD should be agreed by consensus.  

**Avneesh Singh:** the a11y TF: we want to come on with a plan  

**Tzviya Siegman:** Ivan will be back in August  

### 2. Issues
{: #section2}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/6#issuecomment-314486416](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/6#issuecomment-314486416)

**Tzviya Siegman:** last week we went through the issues is github. We have a lot of repetition and some confusion on what we have to accomplish.  

**Tzviya Siegman:** issue 6 is maybe the most important; it is about the abstract model, not the serialization.  

> *Murata Makoto:* I hear lots of noise.

> *Luc Audrain:* Sorry we cannot follow Dave, too much noise

**Dave:** a WP is a collection of Web resources (very difficult to follow, white noise)  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* Identifier of WP.

> *Tzviya Siegman:* Identification as a WP

> *Tzviya Siegman:* List of publication resources.

> *Tzviya Siegman:* Reading order.

> *Tzviya Siegman:* Metadata.

> *Tzviya Siegman:* Nav doc.

> *Dave Cramer:* dauwhe: manifest is just information about the publication as a whole

> *Murata Makoto:* Looks sensible.

> *Hugh McGuire:* looks sensible to me!

**Dave:** made some experimenting this morning.  

> *Luc Audrain:* Please Caller 02, mute, too much noise

> *Murata Makoto:* FYI: OOXML allows embedded OOXML via OLE.

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* @murata - yes and it's hideous!

**Luc Audrain:** seems that some info like metadata may be optional in WP and mandatory in EPUB4. E.g a title. Is it a decision?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** decision to be taken in the metadata TF  

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* @dauwhe - IIRC it does not

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* isrelatedto?

> *Hugh McGuire:* isBasedOn

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* isVersion/RenditionOf?

**Avneesh Singh:** navigation, before making it optional, are we sure that we can infer it from the content?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** mostly because a single page publication does not need it. But all docs I've seen have a navigation.  

> *Murata Makoto:* I don't think that we have to reach consensus about that yet.

**BillK:** basic question; could the identifier of the WP be the URL or URI or IRI of the manifest?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** no answer at the moment  

> *Hugh McGuire:* 3 mins

> *Benjamin Young:* don't make it anything that has a file extension in it...whatever else you do. Not .html and not .json. The web doesn't have file extensions.

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* @hadrien - yes, because sniffing is such a good idea :(

**Tzviya Siegman:** we need a decision on this subject. Some people spent time on it already. But we need more manageable github issues  

> *Hadrien Gardeur:* @leonardr we have media types for that

> *Leonard Rosenthol:* @hadrien we *should* have them, but the HTML spec doesnt actually care about those either.

---

