---
layout: minutes
date: 2018-07-09
title: PWG Weekly telco — 2018-07-09
---

# PWG Weekly telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2018-07-09

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2018Jun/0142.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2018/07/09-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Tzviya Siegman, Wolfgang Schindler, Deborah Kaplan, Chris Maden, Avneesh Singh, George Kerscher, Luc Audrain, Juan Corona, Zheng Xu, Jeff Buehler, Ric Wright, Ben Dugas, Matt Garrish, Jun Gamou, Tim Cole, David Stroup, Ben Walters, Romain Deltour, Charles LaPierre, Garth Conboy, Joshua Pyle, Hadrien Gardeur, Vladimir Levantovsky, Laurent Le Meur, Brady Duga, Gregorio Pellegrino, Karen Myers, Derek Jackson, caitlingebhard, Ben Schroeter, Mustapha Lazrek, Bill Kasdorf, Franco Alvarado, Benjamin Young

**Regrets:** Ivan Herman, Rachel Comerford, Dave Cramer, Nick Ruffilo, Daniel Weck, Marisa DeMeglio, Teenya Franklin, Garth Conboy, Jasmine Mulliken, Jean Kaplansky

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Tzviya Siegman

**Scribe(s):** Juan Corona, Wolfgang Schindler

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Luc Audrain:* laudrain: present+

### 1. minutes review
{: #section1}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2018/2018-07-02-pwg.html](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2018/2018-07-02-pwg.html)

> ***Resolution #1: Minutes approved***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Tzviya Siegman:** minutes are good  

> *Juan Corona:* (warming up as scribe) :)

### 2. review, to help reach consensus
{: #section2}

**Tzviya Siegman:** we need mechanisms, for the UA, scripting in the pub, or external. What's included as a resource? MathML > Mathjax injection.  

**Tzviya Siegman:** PWP to EPUB4 packaging: There's no strict decisions between relationship. But we want roundtripping as per charter  

> *Juan Corona:* got it

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1 oto Garth's mentin of uncomfort with each publication carrying reading syste

**Deborah Kaplan:** lets get some clarification on garth's comment: would scripting be necessary for navigational access?  

> *Juan Corona:* (sorry, this is a bit too much for me right now to scribe, could someone take over? wolfgang? :) )

> *Hadrien Gardeur:* [http://w3c.github.io/wpub/experiments/audiobook/](http://w3c.github.io/wpub/experiments/audiobook/)

**Hadrien Gardeur:** among the experiments we had - if you go on entry page, you will be able to access audiobook via TOC  
… without scripting or WP-aware UA  

> *Luc Audrain:* +1 for examples

**Garth Conboy:** tremendous progress over last couple of months - audiobooks as indication that we are in the right direction - mobydick example, audiobook example  

> *George Kerscher:* Audio book with navigation, do not just audio only.

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

**Joshua Pyle:** what happens when browser totally unaware of WP ? - TOC decisive  
… lot of contents with TOC - very close to being a WP  
… we need a no-scripts thing for non-WP-aware UAs  
… W3C documentations should be WPs  

**Tzviya Siegman:** if you have questions or need clarification, bring it up in github  

### 3. scrolling and pagination (open issue in github)
{: #section3}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207)

**Tzviya Siegman:** Issue 207  

**Tzviya Siegman:** disagreement over who controls what? Should we have pagination info in manifest  

**Laurent Le Meur:** in epub3 matter of expressing a preference, not defined by the author  

> *Brady Duga:* +1 laurent

> *Juan Corona:* +1 to an expression of preference

**Laurent Le Meur:** at least in epub 4 it is a matter of preferences for the whole WP, not for individual items in readingOrder  

**Joshua Pyle:** I agree strongly that the author should be able to define his/her preferences (not in 2 cols, etc.)  

> *Hadrien Gardeur:* expression of preference = override only for accessibility? also available as a user setting?

**Joshua Pyle:** mechanisms to define a certain layout as an author  

**Garth Conboy:** key point is the "please don't", but not "you must not" - expression of author's preferences  
… UA/RS decides finally, but the author may express his preferences  

**Garth Conboy:** content is not boss of the RS  

**Garth Conboy:** publication-wide prefs would be a proposed piece of metadata for the whole WP which is not part of CSS  
… it is a hint  

> *Zheng Xu:* +1 to hint

**tim:** I don't disagree overall - if we say this is a 2 col publication, we should give a CSS  

> *Juan Corona:* +1 to hinting at WP level, css for specific document

**Garth Conboy:** CSS applies on a per-resource basis, but not to a whole WP  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** expectation what a UA should do with a WP - reader modes differ greatly -  
… in ucr we had several cases with pagination  

**Brady Duga:** things that don't exist in CSS - (1) apply CSS to a collection of resources (2) pagination  

> *Garth Conboy:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207)

**Brady Duga:** seems to be uncontroversial issue - hard to implement  

**Joshua Pyle:** whatever you can do in CSS, author or publisher are allowed to do it -  
… WP as a better reader mode of the browser - problem with the web is a lot of incompatible CSS  
… WP as a way to make myriads of content fit into a RS - but more flexible than the reader mode of a browser  

**Garth Conboy:** we certainly will allow each of these resources to have different layout - but reader should allow for cross-resource access  

**Tzviya Siegman:** any author should be able to use any OWP technology - not prescribing or dictating anything  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we should use hints for scroll vs. paginate  

**Joshua Pyle:** value in the consistency that any book looks the same  

**Garth Conboy:** WP-aware UA should provide some level of commonality, but not a must  

**Benjamin Young:** i-frame seamless - core feature: inherited CSS styles - importing the DOM of the iframe into the DOM of the parent  

**Benjamin Young:** we would bring layout-relevant stuff into a config file  

> *Jeff Buehler:* +1

> **Proposed resolution: Allow such a "hint" that would be "publication wide" (e.g., how all the resources should be presented when slamming together all the resources in the default reading order).** *(Garth Conboy)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Garth Conboy:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207#issuecomment-403538496](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207#issuecomment-403538496)

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Mustapha Lazrek:* +1

> *Juan Corona:* +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Tim Cole:* +1

> *Joshua Pyle:* +1 to hints

> *Deborah Kaplan:* +1

**Tzviya Siegman:** are we OK allowing hints for scroll vs. paginate  

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* +1

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Zheng Xu:* +1 to hints

> *Ric Wright:* +1

> *Derek Jackson:* +1

> *Hadrien Gardeur:* +0 because I don't know what we expect from UAs

> *Jun Gamou:* +1

> *Luc Audrain:* +0 until we answer Hadrien’s question

### 4. Republishing WD after schema.org cleanup
{: #section4}

**Garth Conboy:** no official republication of WP since FPWD  
… we want to move ahead with another WD of WP  

**matt:** we were wanting to get it out as is now - we have a reasonably complete infoset and Web IDL  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we would bring it to the PBG to get feedback from the Business Group  

**Garth Conboy:** time to publish current draft!  

**Tzviya Siegman:** take a look at it - if you are an implementer, test it out - has had a major overhaul in terms of structure  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** any meeting between authors/editors planned?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we can do that, be in touch  

**Garth Conboy:** another read-through recommended - still in a very malleable stage  

**Tzviya Siegman:** still will have discussions with schema.org + dave's discussions with CSS WG  

**tim:** need for looking at relationship between WP draft to PWP Draft and Annotation Draft  

**Hadrien Gardeur:** PBG should have a rough idea how things will work in EPUB4 - just show the direction we're pursuing  

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Minutes approved
