---
layout: minutes
date: 2018-04-06
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2018-04-06
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}

**Date:** 2018-04-06

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2018Apr/0001.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2018/04/09-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Wolfgang Schindler, Zheng Xu, Ric Wright, Tzviya Siegman, Jeff Buehler, Gregorio Pellegrino, Toshiaki Koike, Adam Sisco, Ivan Herman, Franco Alvarado, Jun Gamou, Laurent Le Meur, Luc Audrain, Rachel Comerford, Bill Kasdorf, Dave Cramer, Romain Deltour, Avneesh Singh, Joshua Pyle, Teenya Franklin, Benjamin Young, George Kerscher, Marisa DeMeglio, Lillian Sullam, Garth Conboy, Ben Walters, Brady Duga, Tim Cole, Ben Schroeter, Chris Maden, Hadrien Gardeur

**Regrets:** Vladimir Levantovsky, Jasmine Mulliken, Nick Ruffilo, Peter Krautzberger

**Guests:**

**Chair:** Garth Conboy

**Scribe(s):** Wolfgang Schindler

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Approve minutes
{: #section1}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2018/2018-03-26-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2018/2018-03-26-pwg)

> ***Resolution #1: Last minutes approved***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 2. Review and augment F2F Agenda
{: #section2}

> *Garth Conboy:* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Qe8Q8wMC1LKy_-JO-UCy8bFw4D4VN0si1Q5EPW9c-rY/edit#](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Qe8Q8wMC1LKy_-JO-UCy8bFw4D4VN0si1Q5EPW9c-rY/edit#)

**Garth Conboy:** suggested set of topics for F2F  
… not yet topics applied to time schedule  

**Ivan Herman:** we should run through these topics, gauge the needed time for each one  
… you want me to explain various items?  
… 2 weeks ago report on epub 3.2  
… lot of things led to this effort  
… relationship between 3.2 info set and our work  
… Business Group possibly working on ISO standardization of EPUB  
… finalizing WP info set (final set of items)  
… 2 TFs: Manifest and Affordances TF - would like to decide on WAM or not-WAM issue  
… Affordances quite clear, but has to be done  
… 3.2 impact and related issue (first item on the first day?)  
… any question?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** 1 hour for summary wrap up, action items  
… maybe reserve 2 hours for this or even whole afternoon - we need assignments and plan how to go forward  

**Ivan Herman:** I agree  
… the implementation strategies and plans quite complicated - maybe just outline some alternatives  
… is there any report on Sync CG?  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** it would be good to update everybody at F2F  

**Ivan Herman:** testing - we don't have too many testable structures as manifest issue is still open  
… item on packaging - we had some work on that in PWP part  
… we should move ahead but exact packing format is out of our hands  
… Accessibility ,e.g. page number equivalents  
… UA vs. Publication responsibility is not only a11y, but general question  

**Tzviya Siegman:** page numbers - not specific for WP, but also for HTML  

**Garth Conboy:** in EPUB 3.2 as an affordance or info set item or ...  

**Tzviya Siegman:** maybe not an issue for this WG  

**Garth Conboy:** in 3.2 page-map  

**Tzviya Siegman:** added this to DPUB-ARIA  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/TR/dpub-aria-1.0/#doc-pagelist](https://www.w3.org/TR/dpub-aria-1.0/#doc-pagelist)

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/TR/dpub-aria-1.0/#doc-pagebreak](https://www.w3.org/TR/dpub-aria-1.0/#doc-pagebreak)

**Dave Cramer:** ol in HTML  

**Tzviya Siegman:** some of this may be solved already  

> *Garth Conboy:* [http://www.idpf.org/epub/301/spec/epub-contentdocs.html#sec-xhtml-nav-def-types-pagelist](http://www.idpf.org/epub/301/spec/epub-contentdocs.html#sec-xhtml-nav-def-types-pagelist)

**Avneesh Singh:** even there is ARIA-role pagebreak available, will come perhaps a bit later, but extremely important for education  

> *George Kerscher:* I agree with Ivan that everybody wants page functionality.

**Ivan Herman:** not as a separate a11y issue - go to print page number equivalent, see it rather as an affordance  

**Luc Audrain:** discussions with romain about epub-types and ARIA-roles - 2 different things because epub:type for structural semantics and ARIA role for A11Y  
… we need structural semantics in WP  

**Avneesh Singh:** implementation should be accessible, but what happens if it is not - will it fail?  

**Ivan Herman:** exact list of conformance criteria needed to check whether an implementation is conformant  

**Ivan Herman:** Did we miss any major topic  
… we should handle in Toronto?  

> *Benjamin Young:* ivan: I'd like us to demo implementations of "web publications" (lowercase)

**Garth Conboy:** feel free to add your contribution until Wednesday  
… as comment or additional bullet points  

**Ivan Herman:** are we OK?  

> *Wolfgang Schindler:* Topic 3: late breaking news from WAM or Affordances TF or AOB

> *Romain Deltour:* rdeltour: no progress from the WAM TF… :(

> *Dave Cramer:* EPUB3 CG meets this Thursday at 16UTC

**Tzviya Siegman:** any next meeting to announce for the 2 Task Forces?  

---


### 3. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Last minutes approved
